## 1. Explain why a five-stage pipelined RISC processor usually odes not see a five-time spedup when running most programs. Describe a program that can come close to a five-time speedup.
### Answer:
Because there are possible:
+ True dependencies, an instruction is dependent on the output out of another instruction.
+ The program encounters branches, and can't continue executing new instructions until the condition jump has been evaluated.
+ There are cache misses, which makes the program read from the primary memory which is much slower.
+ Some instructions such as reading, multiplying, and dividing take more clock cycles to complete.

A program which could almost be speed up five-fold would have to have:
* No branches, e.g. no switches, conditional loops, or if-statements.
* No mulitplication, division or remainder (%) operators.
* Be ordered in a way that no operation depends on the output of another. e.g. no `int a  = 3 + 2; int b = a - 7;`
* Does not suffer cache misses, which is impossible to start because there are compulsory misses.

## 2. A set-associative cache has multiple compartors which work in parallel. What are the comparing and why are fully associative caches not used for instructions or data caches?
### Answer:
They are comparing if the address in cache is the same the address that which wants to look for and if the data in them is valid.
Fully associative caches are not used because that would come with extra hardware costs and chip space. Since fully associative caches use as many comparators as there are sets in the cache.

## 3. What does the term cache block size refer to? Explaing why a cache block size of 1 certainly is too small and 1024 probably is too large.
### Answer:
The cache block size is the amount (in bytes) that is written to the cache when a cache miss occurs. A size of 1 would be too small since we couldn't exploit spatial locality. A size 1024 bytes would be to large since we would pollute our cache with unrelated data. Then it would be better to have more cache sets instead.

## 5. Explain what the stengths are of each of the following tools when tuning a C program:
### Answer:
+ `gcov` - Needs special compilation flag. Shows code coverage of each line in the program as well as branch frequencies.
+ `gprof` - Needs special compilation flag. Shows call graphs of called functions, where from a function was called and which functions where called from the called function also the time of execution of each called function.
+ `Oprofile` - Can monitor various events, such as the amount of clock-cycles each function/line/instruction takes.
+ `valgrind` - Detect memory leaks and other errors. Disadvantage is that simulates the program and is much slower compared to regular execution.


## 7. Instead of dividing a variable of type `int` by a power of two, it is much faster to use shift instrcution. That is not always sufficient however. Explain why and what you can do about it.
### Answer:
If the compiler uses logical shift instead of arithmetic shift, nothing can be done in the case of division.
The variable that needs to be divided must also be postive for it too work.
