### E02-1
Write a regex describing the langauge of all natural numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, ... Unnecessary initial zeros are allowed.

A:
[0-9]+

### E02-2
Write a regex describing the langauge of all natural binary numbers, 0, 1, 10, 110, ... Unnecessary initial zeros are *NOT* allowed.

A:
(0|1[0-1]*)
###E02-3
Write a regular expression describing the language of all arithmetic expressions with natural numbers and the operators + and *, but without parentheses. Give some examples of expressions in the language.
A:
[0-9]+([\+\*][0-9]+)* (Zero to nine followed by a + or *, then zero to nine, repeated as many times as possible)

### E02-4:
A binary string is a string over the binary alphabet 0, 1. A binary string may be the empty string, in contrast to binary numerals which will always have at least one digit. Write a regular expression describing the language of all binary strings that:
a) contain the string 11.
b) do not contain the string 11.

A a):
[0-1]*11[0-1]* (Any number of ones or zeros, 11, then any number of ones or zeros)
A b):
0*(10+)*(1|epsilon) (Any number of zeros, atleast one of "10", 1 or null char)


### E02-5:
Construct:
a) an NFA that accepts all binary strings that contain the string 11. The automaton
should not be deterministic.
b) a DFA that accepts all binary strings that contain the string 11


### E02-9: The following automaton describes a lexical analyzer. Give suitable names to the final states and write down regular expressions for them.

A:
a-z[a-z0-9]* ID
"+" PLUS
"-" MINUS
[0-9]+ NUMERAL
[0-9]+e[\+\-]{0,1}[0-9]+ NUMPOWER

### E02-10: Suppose that the lexical analyzer for the previous example always tries to do a longest match. How many characters past the end of a token might it have to examine before matching the token? Give an example where this lookahead is required.
A: 3 
1e+a (Need to look at e, +, and a to see that it can only accept 1)
